README.md, before:

# Translate API

A configurable translation system supporting Chinese, English, and Greek translations using Hugging Face's Helsinki-NLP OPUS models.

## Overview
This translation system supports translations between Chinese (zh), English (en), and Greek (el) using Hugging Face's Helsinki-NLP OPUS models. It automatically handles chain translations when direct models aren't available.

## Features
- **Configurable routing**: Define translation paths in `translation_config.json`
- **Automatic chain translation**: Translates through intermediate languages when needed
- **Model caching**: Loaded models are cached for better performance
- **Multiple interfaces**: Use the manager class directly or through utility scripts

## Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/translate-api.git
cd translate-api

# Install dependencies
pipenv install

# Or using pip
pip install transformers torch torchvision torchaudio sentencepiece sacremoses
```

## Files
- `translation_config.json` - Configuration file defining translation routes
- `translation_manager.py` - Main TranslationManager class
- `api.py` - Flask REST API service for translation
- `index.html` - Web interface for the translation service
- `translate.py` - Command-line utility for quick translations
- `translate_example.py` - Interactive demo with examples
- `test_translation.py` - Test script for verification
- `client_example.py` - Example client for the REST API

## Web Interface & API Service

### Starting the Service
```bash
# Start the Flask server
pipenv run python api.py
```

Then open your browser to:
- Web Interface: `http://localhost:8000`
- API Endpoints: `http://localhost:8000/api`

### Web Interface Features
- Clean, modern UI for easy translation
- Language swap functionality
- Character and word counting
- Copy translation to clipboard
- Shows translation path for chain translations
- Keyboard shortcut: Ctrl/Cmd + Enter to translate

### API Endpoints

- `GET /` - Service information
- `GET /health` - Health check
- `GET /languages` - Get available languages and routes
- `POST /translate` - Translate single text
- `POST /translate/batch` - Translate multiple texts
- `DELETE /cache` - Clear model cache

### API Documentation
When the service is running, visit:
- Interactive docs: `http://localhost:8000/docs`
- ReDoc: `http://localhost:8000/redoc`

### Example API Request
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/translate \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"from": "zh", "to": "el", "text": "你好世界"}'
```

Response:
```json
{
  "original_text": "你好世界",
  "translated_text": "Γεια σου κόσμε",
  "from": "zh",
  "to": "el",
  "translation_path": ["Chinese", "English", "Greek"]
}
```

## Usage

### Simple Command Line
```bash
# Direct translations
pipenv run python translate.py zh en "你好世界"
pipenv run python translate.py en el "Hello world"

# Chain translation (Chinese to Greek via English)
pipenv run python translate.py zh el "你好朋友"
```

### Python API
```python
from translation_manager import TranslationManager

# Initialize manager
manager = TranslationManager("translation_config.json")

# Translate text
chinese_text = "你好世界"
english_result = manager.translate(chinese_text, "zh", "en")
greek_result = manager.translate(chinese_text, "zh", "el")  # Chain translation

# Batch translation
texts = ["你好", "世界", "朋友"]
results = manager.translate_batch(texts, "zh", "en")

# Clear model cache when done
manager.clear_cache()
```

### Interactive Demo
```bash
pipenv run python translate_example.py
```

## Translation Routes

### Direct Routes
- Chinese ↔ English: `Helsinki-NLP/opus-mt-zh-en`, `Helsinki-NLP/opus-mt-en-zh`
- English ↔ Greek: `Helsinki-NLP/opus-mt-en-el`, `Helsinki-NLP/opus-mt-tc-big-el-en`

### Chain Routes (via English)
- Chinese → Greek: Chinese → English → Greek
- Greek → Chinese: Greek → English → Chinese

## Configuration Structure
The `translation_config.json` file defines:
- `translation_routes`: Maps source to target languages with model paths
- `language_names`: Human-readable language names
- `default_intermediate`: Language used for chain translations (default: "en")
- `cache_models`: Whether to cache loaded models (default: true)
- `device`: Device for computation ("auto", "cpu", "cuda", or "mps")

## Adding New Languages
To add a new language:
1. Find available models on [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/Helsinki-NLP)
2. Add the language code to `language_names` in config
3. Define translation routes in `translation_routes`
4. Test the new routes

## Performance Notes
- First translation loads models (slower)
- Subsequent translations use cached models (faster)
- Chain translations take longer than direct ones
- MPS (Apple Silicon) provides good performance on Mac
- Use `manager.clear_cache()` to free memory when done

## Examples

### Chinese to Greek (Chain Translation)
```python
manager = TranslationManager()
result = manager.translate("你好，世界！", "zh", "el")
# Output: "Γεια σου, κόσμε!"
```

### Greek to Chinese (Chain Translation)
```python
result = manager.translate("Καλημέρα!", "el", "zh")
# Output: "早上好!"
```

### English to Both
```python
text = "Hello world!"
greek = manager.translate(text, "en", "el")   # "Γεια σου κόσμε!"
chinese = manager.translate(text, "en", "zh")  # "世界好!"
```

## Troubleshooting
- **Model not found**: Check model name in config matches Hugging Face repository
- **Out of memory**: Call `manager.clear_cache()` to free memory
- **Slow performance**: Models are large; first load takes time
- **Authentication errors**: Some models may require Hugging Face authentication

Commit message:

Remove all frontend components, keep API-only functionality

README.md, after:

# Translate API

A configurable translation system supporting Chinese, English, and Greek translations using Hugging Face's Helsinki-NLP OPUS models.

## Overview
This translation system supports translations between Chinese (zh), English (en), and Greek (el) using Hugging Face's Helsinki-NLP OPUS models. It automatically handles chain translations when direct models aren't available.

## Features
- **Configurable routing**: Define translation paths in `translation_config.json`
- **Automatic chain translation**: Translates through intermediate languages when needed
- **Model caching**: Loaded models are cached for better performance
- **Multiple interfaces**: Use the manager class directly or through utility scripts

## Installation

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/yourusername/translate-api.git
cd translate-api

# Install dependencies
pipenv install

# Or using pip
pip install transformers torch torchvision torchaudio sentencepiece sacremoses
```

## Files
- `translation_config.json` - Configuration file defining translation routes
- `translation_manager.py` - Main TranslationManager class
- `api.py` - Flask REST API service for translation
- `translate.py` - Command-line utility for quick translations
- `translate_example.py` - Interactive demo with examples
- `test_translation.py` - Test script for verification
- `client_example.py` - Example client for the REST API

## API Service

### Starting the Service
```bash
# Start the Flask server
pipenv run python api.py

# Or to run in background:
./start_server.sh
```

The API will be available at: `http://localhost:8080`

### API Endpoints

- `GET /` - API information
- `GET /api` - API information (same as root)
- `GET /health` - Health check
- `GET /languages` - Get available languages and routes
- `POST /translate` - Translate single text
- `POST /translate/batch` - Translate multiple texts
- `DELETE /cache` - Clear model cache

### Example API Request
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/translate \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"from": "zh", "to": "el", "text": "你好世界"}'
```

Response:
```json
{
  "original_text": "你好世界",
  "translated_text": "Γεια σου κόσμε",
  "from": "zh",
  "to": "el",
  "translation_path": ["Chinese", "English", "Greek"]
}
```

### Batch Translation Example
```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8080/translate/batch \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"from": "en", "to": "zh", "texts": ["Hello", "World", "Friend"]}'
```

## Usage

### Simple Command Line
```bash
# Direct translations
pipenv run python translate.py zh en "你好世界"
pipenv run python translate.py en el "Hello world"

# Chain translation (Chinese to Greek via English)
pipenv run python translate.py zh el "你好朋友"
```

### Python API
```python
from translation_manager import TranslationManager

# Initialize manager
manager = TranslationManager("translation_config.json")

# Translate text
chinese_text = "你好世界"
english_result = manager.translate(chinese_text, "zh", "en")
greek_result = manager.translate(chinese_text, "zh", "el")  # Chain translation

# Batch translation
texts = ["你好", "世界", "朋友"]
results = manager.translate_batch(texts, "zh", "en")

# Clear model cache when done
manager.clear_cache()
```

### Interactive Demo
```bash
pipenv run python translate_example.py
```

## Translation Routes

### Direct Routes
- Chinese ↔ English: `Helsinki-NLP/opus-mt-zh-en`, `Helsinki-NLP/opus-mt-en-zh`
- English ↔ Greek: `Helsinki-NLP/opus-mt-en-el`, `Helsinki-NLP/opus-mt-tc-big-el-en`

### Chain Routes (via English)
- Chinese → Greek: Chinese → English → Greek
- Greek → Chinese: Greek → English → Chinese

## Configuration Structure
The `translation_config.json` file defines:
- `translation_routes`: Maps source to target languages with model paths
- `language_names`: Human-readable language names
- `default_intermediate`: Language used for chain translations (default: "en")
- `cache_models`: Whether to cache loaded models (default: true)
- `device`: Device for computation ("auto", "cpu", "cuda", or "mps")

## Adding New Languages
To add a new language:
1. Find available models on [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/Helsinki-NLP)
2. Add the language code to `language_names` in config
3. Define translation routes in `translation_routes`
4. Test the new routes

## Performance Notes
- First translation loads models (slower)
- Subsequent translations use cached models (faster)
- Chain translations take longer than direct ones
- MPS (Apple Silicon) provides good performance on Mac
- Use `manager.clear_cache()` to free memory when done

## Examples

### Chinese to Greek (Chain Translation)
```python
manager = TranslationManager()
result = manager.translate("你好，世界！", "zh", "el")
# Output: "Γεια σου, κόσμε!"
```

### Greek to Chinese (Chain Translation)
```python
result = manager.translate("Καλημέρα!", "el", "zh")
# Output: "早上好!"
```

### English to Both
```python
text = "Hello world!"
greek = manager.translate(text, "en", "el")   # "Γεια σου κόσμε!"
chinese = manager.translate(text, "en", "zh")  # "世界好!"
```

## Troubleshooting
- **Model not found**: Check model name in config matches Hugging Face repository
- **Out of memory**: Call `manager.clear_cache()` to free memory
- **Slow performance**: Models are large; first load takes time
- **Authentication errors**: Some models may require Hugging Face authentication
